Title: Hackathon report - p2k16
Date: 2016-08-11
Category: Tech

## [Getting an account](#account) {: #account }

Since end of March I have had an OpenBSD account which means that I can do
some commits on my own, the login I use is *danj*. I was then invited
to [p2k16](https://www.openbsd.org/images/hackathons/p2k16.gif) which
took place in Nantes, about 100kms from where I live (Rennes).

## [Planning](#planning) {: #planning }

I read most of hackathons report (if not all) on undeadly, and people
often says that they had plans. So I thought I was going to do the
same. Finally I did only a few things that I planned and other things
I didn't plan at all :)

## [Meeting people](#meetingpeople) {: #meetingpeople }

Since 2013 I've been talking with jca@ (mainly about OpenBSD but not only),
though I never had the chance to meet him. Finally at p2k16 I could
finally meet him.

I've also been talking on irc with landry@ for quite a long time, I
was eager to meet him as I really appreciate him because we laugh
together.

I could also see again mpi@, who I didn't saw since my
[internship](./some-news-from-my-internship.html).

During the hackathon I could also talk with people that I had never
talked to, before like espie@ or eric@. It was both funny and
interesting as I learnt a couple of things while I was chatting with
them.

## [Even teaching people](#teaching) {: #teaching }

I was still heavily learning at lot of things, whatever I was doing,
though I was looking forward to share my (little) knowledge. I could
show some tricks to tsg@ who was porting some python ports and at the
same time working on
[portgen](http://man.openbsd.org/OpenBSD-current/man1/portgen.1) to
teach it to handle python ports. I was really happy/proud to be able to
help him.

I even could teach eric@ how to use cvs again :D. He didn't touch cvs
for a while and in the mean time, new tools were created to help us like
[portimport](http://man.openbsd.org/OpenBSD-current/man1/portimport.1)
and he didn't know its existence so I showed him thus he could use it
rather than importing his port (that I reviewed as it was a python
port :3) manually.

## [The work](#work) {: #work }

I begun the week with committing an update to legit and its chains of
\*_DEPS, it was quite a pain so I was happy to be over. After that, I
updated a bunch of little ports. I reviewed a few ports for
shadchin@. Python ports are usually easy (IMO) but the problem is
that there are always tons of \*_DEPS which quickly sums up.

I left a bit the python ports to update osm2pgsql. They switched their
build system from autotools to cmake. Some people don't like
autotools, other don't like cmake and many hate both but in my case I
don't know them well so it doesn't make a lot of difference. At first
I didn't succeed to make the test pass (but of course osm2pgsql was
tested to be working), but after being home I worked on it again, and
I was glad of my work.

One of my plan was to port py-tox as it's used by nearly all python
software for the tests. jca@ told me to look into
[openbsd-wip](https://github.com/jasperla/openbsd-wip) and indeed it
was already done by shadchin@, I bring it to ports@ and ok'ed it so he
imported it.

Finally, I begin to work on poezio, a python3 xmpp client. I needed
some directions as some of its \*_DEPS were python3-only and currently
the port infrastructure for python ports is mainly axed towards
python2, and sthen@ kindly helped me.

## [The end](#end) {: #end }

Of course, I was sad when it ended, seeing people leaving
gradually. I was really happy of the whole week, meeting people I was
quite fond of. The meals were goods, with lots of
[galettes](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galette_de_sarrasin) and
[crepes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cr%C3%AApe) (even though we
were not in Brittany). Thanks to all who made it possible! Would
definitely do again.
